[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We're all familiar with the
illusion that objects made out
of matter appear to be
distinct and separate entities.
In contrast, quantum
physics emphasizes
that everything is
entangled, forming
a whole, or singularity.
Is it possible we live
in an entangled universe?
I'm your host, Bruce
Lipton, for this series
on inner revolution.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
To visualize how
what we perceive
as matter is influenced
by energy fields,
we must first understand
how energy waves entangle
and generate constructive
and destructive interference
patterns that influence the
character of the material
world.
Both quantum physics
and the new biology
emphasize the influence of
the mind's energy field,
consciousness, as fundamental
in shaping our life experiences.
In previous episodes, we
provided a simple formula
for the nature of life.
And that is protein plus
signal equals behavior.
Now, the issue is we know
what the proteins are.
But what kind of
signals are used
in creating the life
that we experience?
Well, conventional science
and conventional medicine,
allopathic medicine,
employs the idea
that the body is a
physical mechanism
and can only respond
to physical signals,
hence the use of
pharmaceuticals and drugs.
However, there is
a new understanding
that completely changes
our belief system,
because quantum physics
reveals that energy is really
the source of everything.
And so looking at the
body as a physical entity
is actually an illusion,
an incorrect understanding.
Well, when we talk
about energy, we
can actually define it using
two different characteristics
of energy.
One is force and
one is information.
Energy as a force,
for example, is
what is used to drive our car.
Energy is a force
that creates movement.
And this is the force
that medicine actually
considers energy that influences
physical matter by disturbing
it.
This is called ionizing energy.
It's energy like UV
light from the sun when
you get a sunburn or x-rays
when too many x-rays actually
can burn the tissue.
Then these energies
become part of the realm
of conventional medicine
because of their influence
on our so-called physical body.
However, there is a
different use for energy.
Energy is also information.
So, for example, the
cell phone broadcasts
that are going through
this room right now,
well, they don't
exhibit much force.
But they do carry a
lot of information.
Television signals?
Not forceful, but information.
So the idea is this.
Yes, the force
element of energy is
covered by conventional
allopathic medicine.
But what about the
function of energy
that deals with information?
Interestingly enough, that
is with the primary subject
of complementary and
integral medicine,
bringing in energy
fields, consciousness,
and thought into our world.
And so it becomes
important for us
to recognize that
information as energy
is profoundly important in
shaping who and what we are.
We have two perceptions now
about what controls biology--
physical things, such as
drugs, or energy fields.
Well, it's interesting
because a physicist
by the name of McClare at
the University of London
wanted to identify, is
signaling using chemistry
more effective or less
effective than using signals
provided by energy?
Well, there's a
profound difference
in which type of source of
information is being used,
chemistry or energy
fields, for this reason.
Perhaps you might remember,
when you were in chemistry class
early in your
school history, you
mixed a couple of
components in a test tube.
And you held that test
tube, and you felt the heat
coming from that test tube.
It's called the
heat of reaction.
It's a thermochemical coupling.
And I say, well, what's
significant about that?
By definition, heat
is wasted energy.
So significance is, when
you use a chemical or a drug
to carry information, when
that chemical or drug binds
to another chemical in the body,
according to McClare, up to 98%
of the available energy
of a chemical drug
is actually dissipated
and wasted as heat.
In contrast, energy
signals don't give off
thermochemical reactions.
Energy signals are
almost 100% transferred
between the source and the
receptor of that energy.
There is no loss.
So according to
McClare, quantum physics
reveals that, in biology,
energy vibration signals
would undoubtedly be selected
over chemical signals
in controlling our behavior.
Well, what is the actual role?
How do we know that energy
vibration is that important?
In a more recent study
in the journal "Nature,"
one of the most prestigious
journals on the planet,
there's an interesting article
by two authors, Pophristic
and Goodman.
I love the title, because
science is like the church.
We put into Latin, and
nobody knows what the heck
we're talking about.
So listen to this title.
"Hyperconjugation
not steric repulsion
leads to the staggered
structure of ethane."
What does that mean?
Well, it means simply this.
Ethane molecules twist
and rotate as molecules.
They twist and rotate.
I say, well, what's
the relevance?
It is the same process that
proteins use to create life.
And here's the point.
Science is based
on predictability.
And what Pophristic and
Goodman wanted to do
was predict the movement from
ethane's primary structure
and all the intermediate
stages as the ethane manifests
its secondary structure.
And if you can
predict the movements,
then you would understand
the mechanism that
provides for those movements.
Well, they started off using the
principles of Newtonian physics
to try to identify the
intermediate stages
of the ethane structure.
Guess what?
They were unable to predict
those intermediate stages.
Point is very clear.
The movement of
that ethane molecule
was not using Newtonian
physics in the process.
So they then applied quantum
mechanical principles
to the same ethane molecule.
And in so doing, they were
able to accurately predict
all the intermediate
stages of that molecule
from its original shape
to its secondary shape.
The significance is profound,
because basically what it says
is the movement of molecules,
the same as the movement
of proteins that create
life, are actually
regulated by quantum
physical principles
and not Newtonian principles.
The significance of
this was actually
spelled out in an editorial
in the very same journal
of "Nature."
The editorial's title I love--
"A new twist on
molecular shape."
The author, Frank
Weinhold, writes
this in the introduction.
"What are the
forces that control
the twisting and folding of
molecules into complex shapes?"
Well, that's a good question.
And the reason why
it's a good question
is because that's the mechanism
where life comes from.
So if we could understand the
forces that provide for that,
then we can understand the
forces that provide for life.
Frank Weinhold goes
on to say, "Don't
look for the answers in your
organic chemistry textbook."
That sounds a little
cryptic, but here's
what's important about it.
Conventional medicine is
based on the principles
in organic chemistry.
And what Weinhold
is saying is, if you
want to understand how
life works, don't look
in that textbook, because
organic chemistry is predicated
on Newtonian physics
and does not understand
the relevance of
the quantum physics
in controlling the
character of life.
So the belief in
materialism that we've
been talking about
as the foundation
of the current culture, which
is scientific materialism,
is flawed.
Why?
Because the idea of
materialism, a Newtonian idea,
is not valid in a
quantum physical world,
the one in which we
are living right now.
So basically it says we
have to understand life
from a different perspective.
And so I show you this picture
of two atoms interacting.
Our conventional
understanding is two atoms
come together, have a
collision, and, in that process,
create chemistry.
But that is a
Newtonian illusion.
And so if you want to
understand how atoms interact
to create life, we
have to understand
the nature of energy waves.
And so, instead of seeing atoms
as individual particles, what
we can look at is atoms
as the presence of waves.
When atoms interact,
it's the waves
that are interacting,
because there's
nothing physical in the atom.
Well, that's called
interference.
Where the ripples interact,
they create special patterns
of interference.
Well, the interference of
these atoms are the ripples.
But the ripples
constitute the field.
And the field is
the invisible energy
of ripples of energy surrounding
all of us at all times.
Also recognize this.
Consciousness, thought, is
an expression of the field.
And then I emphasize
Albert Einstein's quote.
The field-- the energy--
is the sole governing
agency of the particle--
particle being matter.
And that changes how
we look, because it's
been left out of our
understanding of science.
And to try to get
an understanding
of how complex this
is, imagine seeing
raindrops fall on a pond--
and not looking
at the raindrops,
but looking at all the ripples
that come from the raindrops.
So, for a moment, consider
the raindrop as an atom,
and the ripples it's
generating are going
across the surface of the pond.
Look at the complex interaction.
Everything is interconnected.
All the waves from all the
ripples from all the raindrops
are interfering with each other.
To understand how
biology works, we
are a set of ripples and waves.
But we're in a field
of ripples and waves,
and we also generate
ripples and waves
when we express consciousness.
When ripples come together,
they interfere with each other.
But it's also called
entanglement--
that they're connected
with each other
and they're
influencing each other.
Now, to illustrate
this point, I'm
going to use a diagram
with waves in it.
And I drop both rocks into
the pond at the same time.
And the ripples are
coming toward each other.
And in this case, I'm going to
overlap the ripples from wave A
with the ripples from wave B.
When the waves
come together, you
add up the values of the
waves and the overlap.
Plus 1 plus 1, the
value is plus 2.
When two lower
energies come together
and they're both in
harmony, they add up.
And the waves are much higher.
Wave height is equal to power.
So the point is simply this.
Constructive interference
where the waves come together
and create higher waves is
also recognized in our life
experiences as good vibes.
And so when you're in that
field, the energy around you
is interfering with you
in a constructive manner.
And as a result, you are
feeling more energy--
good vibes.
Vibes are the source of life.
Energy is the source of life.
When you have a lot of
energy, you have life.
When you have no energy,
you have no life.
So basically, when energies are
in harmony and they interfere--
constructive interference--
it presents something that
we refer to as good vibes.
And it's interesting,
because we use these vibes
to manage our lives.
I'll give you a simple
insight, which I really
find kind of interesting.
Let's say there's a big shoe
sale at a major department
store.
There are 10 pair
of shoes for sale.
They're all exactly
the same price.
They come in all your
sizes and colors.
But they're all
different styles.
You go into the store.
You're going to buy
a pair of shoes.
What do you think the final
decision was based on?
Not the costs.
They're all the same.
Not the color, size.
You can get those in any one.
The final decision is what?
The shoes made you feel better.
The shoes gave you a feeling.
You picked a pair of
shoes because of what?
Feelings.
What's feeling?
Energy interactions.
It's related to everything
we do in the world--
the people you meet up
with, the places you live.
What's going on around
you in the energy
is actually interfering
with your energy.
And when the energy around
you is in harmony with you,
guess what it does?
It enhances your energy.
It empowers you.
Constructive
interference-- good vibes.
Well, that's one
side of the story.
Here's the other side.
What if I take the two
rocks that I had before,
but I dropped one before
I dropped the other?
What we can see is,
the two waves coming,
you can see they're
out of phase.
And then we overlap them
like we did previously.
And I say this is interference.
Plus 1 is the height.
Minus 1 is the valley.
Add them up--
0.
The waves are canceling
each other out.
The energy from
one is interfering
not in a constructive manner,
but in a destructive manner.
But guess what?
You've also experienced this.
But it's called bad vibes.
It's an interaction you
have with the environment.
It takes away your energy,
which by definition means
takes away your life.
I'll give you an example.
You're in a city.
You don't know
where you're going.
It's dark.
You're nervous, now,
about where you are.
And all of a sudden, you feel
your energy dissipate, go away.
You feel like you're vulnerable.
You have very low energy.
Your biology was interacting
with the waves and the field
around you.
But these interactions are out
of harmony with each other.
And as a result, the interfering
waves' destructive interference
are canceling the energy.
Well, energy is life.
Canceling energy leads to death.
And all of a sudden, it
say, oh, my goodness.
You can make decisions in
your life appropriately
when you read the energy first.
And the significance is this.
You always will
move toward things
that give you enhanced energy
that will enhance your life.
In contrast, you
should always move away
from anything that
takes away your energy--
destructive
interference, bad vibes--
because that's an information
that's telling you
you're no longer
safe in your field.
Interesting point.
Humans have vast
language capabilities.
But guess what?
Every organism, from
bacteria all the way up
and including
humans, also respond
to the invisible
energy waves reading
good vibes and bad vibes.
And I say this is how a
primitive organism know
how to sustain its life.
It moves toward anything
that gives it a good vibe
and moves away from anything
that gives it a bad vibe.
And this is how an organism
maintains its energy.
Now, it's interesting,
because most of us
have been programmed,
when we're young,
not to go by the
feelings but listen
to what the person has to say.
And I go, that's the
first big mistake.
If you read the vibes of that
individual, the vibes are true.
The words can be made up.
That means while those words
coming from that individual
are so wonderful
and feel so great,
the intent of that
individual is not actually
to support your
viability, because, just
interacting with that
person, you already
can feel the bad vibes.
So the relevance is this.
The primary language on
this planet is vibration.
Reading vibration
can enhance your life
and save you from any problems
that destructive interference
would have caused.
It's important to recognize
the vital nature of reading
energy fields-- so vital that
every organism on this planet
actually creates its life
based on reading these fields.
And everything generates fields.
So, for example, if we look at
a picture of humans and I say,
oh, look, you can
see all these humans
in this picture, I go,
well, as we've talked about,
that's actually the reflection
of the photons of light,
because a human is
actually an energy.
And I say, well, the
significance is this.
When we use light
to reference people,
we see people as individuals.
But if we could read the
energy fields of these people,
guess what we would find?
All the energies are
interacting with each other.
In a family, yes,
they're independent.
A mother, a father,
and children.
And yet, in a family,
each one of them
is generating an energy field.
And entanglement, the
interaction of energy,
is occurring throughout.
And the relevance
is simply this.
A person shows up
at a doctor's office
complaining about some
illness or some problem
with their life.
The doctor looks at him
and says, let's assess you.
We'll read all
your chemical tests
and all these different tests.
We're going to read that out
and tell you what's going on.
Well, that's an interesting
way to look at it.
But here's something
that's more important.
What's going on is
not only associated
with what's going on in
my own particular body.
What's going on
is the environment
in which I'm living.
Why?
Because the energy
of everything around
me is impacting my energy.
And in some cases,
it can enhance
my life and my
vitality and my health,
or the energy can take it apart.
If you judge a person's
health by just looking
at their physical
presence in front of you,
you're missing what might be
the most important contributors
to health or disease
in this case.
And that is the environment.
The environment in
which that person lives,
the environment in
which that person works,
the environment of the people
that surround this individual.
These are all very
critical understandings.
And so just looking at
the physical expression
of a body trying to figure out
where the illness comes from
is frequently misleading,
because the illness does not
have to start in the body.
It could have been due to bad
vibes, destructive interference
of the environment in
which that person lives.
To illustrate the
importance of how
the field, the energy around
you, shapes your physicality,
I'd like to show you
a simple experiment.
In this experiment,
what I did was
take a bar of iron and a file.
And I filed that iron down and
created a pile of iron dust,
or iron filings.
I take those iron filings,
put them in a salt shaker,
and I sprinkle them
on a piece of paper.
This is the image that you
get by sprinkling these iron
filings on the paper.
It's a random pile
of iron filings.
I say, throw it away.
Sprinkle again.
Another random pile
of iron filings.
Every time you sprinkle the
iron filings, random pile.
But now I enhance the
experiment a little bit.
I buy a magnet.
And when I put that magnet
underneath the piece of paper,
guess what?
They don't form a random pile.
The invisible magnetic field
is shaping the iron filings
to form a
complementary structure
to the invisible magnetic field.
Eistein-- the field is
the sole governing agency
of the particle-- in this
case, the iron filings.
And the relevance
about this is matter
plus field equals structure.
Matter without field?
Random pile.
And all of a sudden it says then
the structure that you express
is not due to just
the structure.
It's due to the fields
around this structure.
Now, let's look at that
slide of iron filings
over the magnetic field.
And now, instead
of iron filings,
let's suggest that
this is a tumor.
And those iron filings
are tumor cells.
And then I would
say, well, what's
the conventional understanding?
The allopathic Newtonian
vision is, well, this tumor
must be shaped by
something physical.
And so we take apart the cells.
And we look for what?
Onco gene.
A cancer gene.
A gene that causes this problem.
And guess what?
You can take apart all
the cells you want.
There is no gene
that caused that.
It's a field that causes that.
The field is shaping the
cells, just as the field
shapes iron filings.
And we keep looking
inside the cell to say,
where the heck did
that cancer come from?
It does not come from genes.
Simple fact.
There is no gene
that causes cancer.
I always get concerned
when women do a test
and they find that they have
the BRCA1 cancer gene, how
that really messes with their
head based on the belief
system.
Belief system--
you got the gene.
You can expect the cancer.
Angelina Jolie, she had
a double mastectomy.
She didn't have the cancer.
She just figured, because her
mother died of breast cancer,
her grandmother died
of breast cancer,
that she's going to die as well.
So she figured, if
I have a mastectomy,
I won't have the problem.
Well, that's not true,
because the same gene also
causes uterine cancers as well.
But here's the other story.
And the story is this.
Does having the BRCA1 gene mean
you're going to get the cancer?
And the answer is absolutely no.
50% of the women with the
gene never get the cancer.
This is a very important fact.
Why?
Possession of the gene
doesn't mean cancer.
It's the lifestyle associated
with possession of that gene
that will manifest the cancer.
And that's why half
the women are not
expressing a negative or
non-supporting lifestyle.
They're expressing a
normal healthy life.
And in spite of having the
gene, they won't get the cancer.
But somebody with that gene
who is not living in harmony,
not living in the balance
of the environment,
they can get the cancer.
Point simply is this--
the gene does not
cause the cancer.
It is correlated with cancer.
The cause is the field--
how we are living our lives.
And all of a sudden, this
profoundly important point
comes to the forefront
and says this.
Less than 10% of disease
has any physical connection
with our genetics and
maybe even less than 1%.
So a cancer is not a disease
as much as it is a symptom.
A cancer is a symptom.
I'm not living in harmony.
Look what I manifest.
Guess what?
Changing the
character of your life
is profoundly
important in changing
the character of a cancer.
Something called a
spontaneous remission
occurs quite frequently.
What is a spontaneous remission?
An individual is
given a prognosis
that, oh, my
goodness, you're going
to die in about three months.
I say, well, what does
that individual do?
If they buy the belief of
the doctor, guess what?
They're going to create
a consciousness that
will manifest that
physical experience.
And the cancer will kill
them in about three months.
But in contrast, other
people will go, well, wait.
If I'm going to die
in three months,
then I'm going to
quit the stupid job.
And I'm going to leave the
aggravating environment
that I'm in.
I'm going to go on
the road, and I'm
going to enjoy myself for
the last three months.
And guess what?
Three months come and go.
Six months, a year, five
years, they're still here.
What did they do
that was different?
They didn't change
the physical cancer.
They changed the environment
that promoted the cancer.
A spontaneous remission, there's
a change in the belief system,
a change in the consciousness.
And this is
profoundly important,
because this is where we have to
understand the control of life
comes from.
What is your consciousness?
Are you visioning a
healthy, happy life?
Or are you concerned that
running in your family
is cardiovascular
disease or diabetes?
Point is very simple.
What image you hold
in your consciousness
is translated into a
physical expression.
You can absolutely
change your life
by changing your consciousness,
because this is the foundation
behind epigenetics.
And this is the story of
how vibration will also
select our genes
and the character
of that genetic expression.
The insights offered
by quantum physics
really reveal the whole story
about how our consciousness is
creating our life experiences.
If I go back to 1930, just
after quantum physics came
into the world of
science, I want
to leave you with a quote
from Sir James Jeans.
"The stream of
knowledge is heading
towards a
non-mechanical reality.
The universe begins to look
more like a great thought
than like a great machine.
Mind no longer appears to
be an accidental intruder
into the realm of matter.
We ought rather hail it as
the creator and the governor
of the realm of matter."
And to follow that
up, at the same time,
Sir Arthur Eddington,
another physicist, wrote,
"It is difficult for the
matter of fact physicists
to accept the view that the
substratum of everything
is a mental character."
These two physicists
are actually
giving us the most
important conclusions
of quantum physics--
that mind and consciousness
and energy fields
are what shape our
life experiences.
And when we understand
that, then we say, well,
if you want to
change your life, you
don't have to do
anything physical.
But you do have to do
something in regard
to your consciousness.
So in conclusion, what
does this mean for you?
The quality of
life is profoundly
influenced by energy.
When energy waves
interfere with each other,
they may express
constructive interference
that enhances life energy or
destructive interference that
actually cancels life energy.
To learn how we can
control our consciousness
and manifest the
life we desire, it
is first necessary
to understand how
cells manage environmental
signals and controlling
behavior and genetics.
Next, we will describe the
nature of the cell's brain
and how it translates
environmental signals that
control our biology.
Thank you for joining me.
I'm your host, Bruce Lipton, for
the series on inner revolution
through biological change.
[MUSIC PLAYING]